736 2514
This is the phone number to use to understand 90% of all music theory !
736 2514
It's simple as that. Not Jenny's number from that song but sing it if you want 
736 2514

It's made up of two lines 
7  3
6  2
5  1
4

7
     6
          5
  3            4
       2  
            1

each line decreasing by one each time - what could be easier ? 
736 2514 !

How do you use this number ? Well you call it !! And calling starts with C.

    __ 
  /   \
 |
 |
  \ __/

C is nearly an 'O' - it has zero sharp corners, and the key of C has zero sharps or flats
It's all on the white keys of a piano and sounds like the famous tune 'do re mi'

(show piano and play)

But getting back to our number (what was it??) (736 2514 !!)
Lets look at our letters laid out in order of the number of corners

    __        ___
  /   \      *   \       *      *----*   *-
 |           |    |     / \     |        |  >*
 |    __*    |    |    /___\    |--      *_
  \ __/ |    *__ /    /     \   |        |  >*
                     *       *  *----*   *-

The number of corners is the number of sharps in that key (the number of black keys)
Remember C had no corners and no black keys ? 

The phone number tells you which sharps. G is the first, so its sharp is the 7.
The 7th is the one just before you get back to G - its F, which becomes F#.
This is what the 7 in the phone number tells us !

The letter with the next highest number of corners is D.
The key of D has two sharps (two corners), and these are the notes 7 and 3, the first two digits in the phone number.
C# and F# are found at positions 3 and 7 up from D.

The key of A works the same - three corners, three digits from the phone number
The key of A has three sharps, 7 3 and 6, or C# F# and G#

So you see what's happening ? 
When we went to G we added F#  and now had note   7     sharped
When we went to D we added C#  and now had notes  3,7   sharped
When we went to A we added G#  and now had notes  3,6,7 sharped
and so on...

Each time we use one more digit from the phone number 736 2514.
Each time, the sharp that just appeared is one letter less than the key we're in.
This is how you can tell what major scale key you are in by looking at sheet music. 

(We'll get to scales soon)

Now this talk of sharps and flats makes a lot of sense for piano, but what about guitar
where there are no black and white keys ?!

Guitarists see (or hear) things differently from the rest of us NORMAL people :)

This is how most guitarists lay out an octave of a major scale on a guitar

string    |  |  |  |  |   

6        --6-----7--8--
5        --3--4-----5--
4        --1-----2-----

What's a flat, and what's a sharp they ask !!

Well, lets' straighten out that pattern so we can understand it, and look at it on a single string.

1-----2-----3--4-----5-----6-----7--8

That's just the pattern of the white and black keys of the piano in disguise !

Well, it doesn't matter whether it's crowded into a few frets across different strings, it's the 
sound of the notes that matters. Some just like it compressed (guitar players) and others like it
laid out over a wider distance (keyboard players).

Now - we can see that whether you play the white keys of a piano starting from 'C', or go up
a certain number of frets at a time on a guitar, you are still climbing the scale in a specific way.

The pattern of 2, 2, 1, 2, 2, 2, 1 (in terms of number of frets or white/black keys) is the one
which will sound like the do-re-mi song no matter where you start !

Fear not, because you often hear guitarists talking about mixolydian mode or major scales or
minor scales, or pentatonic scales, and all of that is contained within the phone number too !

For example, the pentatonic scale is smack in the middle of the phone number, literally.
Drop the left and right parts of the phone number, and you've got 36251. These are the notes
of the pentatonic scale - 123 5 and 6. 

But before we get into that any deeper, lets talk about modes, which are the different ways
you can play the notes in the key of C to get other keys like A minor.

We just talked about a rule we use to use the phone number (736 2514!) to tweak some notes
so that the do-re-mi song sounds the same no matter where we start. In the key of C we tweaked
no notes, in the key of G, one note, etc.. But guitar players don't play by the rules, no !

What if, in the key of G, we dont raise the 7th note to an F# like we're supposed to in order
to get the do-re-mi song, (because who likes to play by the rules ?) and instead we get:

(GABCDEF -  G mixolydian).

This is the first mode variation, just like G was the key that introduced the first sharp,
mixolydian is the first mode to not sharp it, and so I associate 'mix' mode with G. If you play
the notes in the 'normal' C scale, but start on G, you get a mixolydian mode.

Having a flat 7 is the definition of what makes the mixolydian mode different from the do-re-mi mode.

To go through the modes in order, though, we have to go backwards through the phone number ..

1-  ionian major scale mode (start C scale on C, zero  notes flatted)
5-  mixolydian mode         (start C scale on G, one   note  flatted)
2-  dorian mode             (start C scale on D, two   notes flatted)
6-  aeolian mode            (start C scale on A, three notes flatted)
3-  phrygian mode           (start C scale on E, four  notes flatted)
7-  locrian mode            (start C scale on B, five  notes flatted)
4-  lydian mode             (start C scale on F, six   notes flatted)

(dont worry - you won't be quizzed on the mode names ! the first few are the most important in practice,
 and you should just be able to recognize their names for now, which are admittedly quite strange!)

----

So from this you can figure out any thing !!

Example 1: How do I play in the key of A dorian ? 
An A (three corners) should have three sharps, but because it's dorian, its 3 and 7 will be flatted,
leaving only the 6, the F# as the only sharp.
A piano player would play on all white keys except F#, and 'come home' and depart from the A.
A guitar player would do it differently: they'd remember that Dorian means starting two frets 
higher than you should (D dorian = C major). So they'd put their fingers in place on the scale of G,
but they'd begin and end the main phrases on the 'A' instead of the G. For a guitar player, knowing 
which notes are played sharp or flat, is really just a way to find the key to place their fingers at.

Example 2: How do I play in the key of F ? 
Great question- notice F in position 4 relative to C. In our phone number, 4 is the last position. So 
we've added a lot of sharps at this point. Wouldn't it just be easier to mark some of the notes flat ? 
That's what happens with F. Instead of calling nearly every note sharp, we just call the B a Bb, and it
works out with all the rest.

On a guitar, the key of F is just one string up (in pitch) from the key of C. So you'd basically move
the pattern to one string higher, as long as you don't collide with that part of the guitar where 
a certain two strings break the rules with respect to all the other strings..

How do flat keys work like Bb ?
  Remember:  F BEAD. 
  How to read this acronym ? 
    Key of F  : flats Bb
    Key of Bb : flats Bb Eb
    Key of Eb : flats Bb Eb Ab
    Key of Ab : flats Bb Eb Ab Db
    Key of Db : (ahh, gotcha - this is the same as C#, just by another name!)

How do transposing instruments work (like a Bb clarinet) ? 
These cruel tricks of nature were the result of some joke where a conductor gave three different
horn/woodwind players three different sheets of music, each with the note C plainly written on them,
and who enjoyed their confusion when all three played that C and a full chord came out !! 







